If you want to build a business using
social media, there are a few huge
mistakes you have to avoid making. And I
see people fall into these over and over
again. I call these the seven deadly
pitfalls. If you can avoid all of these,
it's pretty much guaranteed that you
will eventually win on social media. But
if you fall into even one of these
traps, it will set you back months or
even years immediately. So, in this
video, I'm going to break down all seven
deadly pitfall mistakes that you need to
avoid at all costs when you're growing
on social media. I'll cover what to do,
what not to do, and most importantly,
how to fix it if you've already made one
or more of these critical mistakes. By
the way, I'm Callaway. I have a million
followers. I've done billions of views,
and content is all I do all day long.
All right, mistake number one is super
simple, but it's devastating for the
people that make it. And it has to do
with running paid ads. And I'll say it
super plainly. If you have an organic
account that's already working on social
media, do not ever run paid ads directly
through that organic account. I'm
talking about boosting organic posts
directly. Do not do it. If you've
already done this, you'll know
immediately what I'm about to say and
why this is such a critical mistake.
When you run paid ads through an organic
account, one of two things is going to
happen. First, you send a signal to the
social platform that you're willing to
pay for additional reach. This means you
have money in their eyes. When they
detect this, it's rumored that the
platforms will slowly throttle down the
free organic reach you are getting to
try to bait you into continuing to pay.
Now, they'll never admit this and it's
anecdotal, can't be proved, but if you
think about it, it makes a ton of sense
if this is how it works. If I was
running a social platform trying to
optimize for ad revenue, that's exactly
what I would do. Now, I'm not here to
spread rumors that I can't substantiate
for sure. So, let's just assume the
platforms don't literally throttle you
just because you paid. It doesn't even
really matter because the second thing
that happens when you run paid ads on an
organic account is that you will notice
your reach go down. It's not the
platforms doing it on purpose, but
something happens that will force your
reach down. Let me explain. When you
have an organic account that's working
and you're posting content for free and
viewers are coming in, the algorithm has
a super clear profile of exactly who is
watching and engaging. This is called
your audience avatar. When you run paid
ads, you bring in a whole new crop of
viewers to your original organic
audience, many of which aren't a perfect
exact match to that ideal audience
avatar. And when they come in, they
don't engage because of the content on
its own. they engage because of whatever
promise the ad was making. In other
words, by paying for more reach, you've
actually diluted the clarity that the
algorithm has on who your audience is.
So, when you run your next organic post
for free, a portion of those viewers
that see it are the ones that came in
from the paid ads, and they won't engage
or watch it because they didn't actually
like you or the content in the first
place. This leads to weak performance
metrics on the organic post, which
signals to the algorithm your content
has gotten worse, so they push it less.
That's why your views go down. The truth
is, your content may not have gotten
worse, but your content audience fit
did. So, when you run paid ads on an
organic account that's working, either
the platforms literally throttle you or
your newly expanded but less targeted
audience engages less. Either way, your
organic reach is going down. Now, I
can't say conclusively exactly how many
paid ads it takes to trigger this
effect. I also can't say the amount of
ad spend it would take to trigger this.
But if this has happened to you and you
had an account working, you ran paid ads
and now the account is no longer
working, you'll know immediately this is
real and how devastating that can be.
Now, I'll say this, there is a way to
revive an organic account where this has
happened. And the way is by shifting the
mix of your audience more organic and
less paid. So, all you have to do is
post a ton of organic content, probably
months worth in a row, and try to slowly
rebalance that mix to be more organic.
But if you did run a lot of paid ads and
your audience is a lot of those
pay-to-play people that didn't really
want to be there, your account might be
cooked. So my recommendation, and I
cannot say this clearly enough, once you
have an organic account that is working,
do not run paid ads directly from that
account. Now, here is a really important
distinction when it comes to paid ads.
And this is where I will square my
advice from all the things you're
hearing from people like Gary Vee and
others. It's true that the best strategy
for using social media is to first run
organic posts to verify what works and
then juice those organic posts with ads.
That is the optimal strategy. But here's
the critical difference. When you run
them as ads, you don't boost directly
from the organic golden goose. You
either run them from a meta ads account
that's connecting multiple accounts
together or you take the creative that
worked to a separate account designed
for paid and boost it there. Once you
have the golden goose, you do not boost
directly from that or you'll lose the
organic reach. This is the nuance that
not a lot of people talk about, but I've
seen over and over again is a huge
mistake from business owners. Again, I'm
not saying paid ads are bad. Paid ads
are amazing, but running paid ads on an
organic account that's already getting
you free reach is a disaster. All right,
the second major social media mistake
that I see is people that get spread too
thin way too early. I call this failure
by suffocation. Not to be crude, here's
what happens. Typically, someone will
start to get some traction on one social
platform. Maybe it's Instagram, maybe
it's Tik Tok, maybe it's YouTube. But
what happens is that instead of doubling
down to really focus your attention to
scale and systematize, instead they
immediately try to expand from one to
many platforms. When you do this, you
fracture your focus, kind of like
Voldemort's Horcruxes in Harry Potter.
And this suffocates that initial golden
goose platform of the creative and
operational attention that it needed.
So, you go from spinning one plate
successfully to spinning five plates
poorly. And this is probably the biggest
hidden mistake in all of business, not
just content. You jump to a second,
third, or fourth battle before winning
and locking things up on the home front
first. Now, I know this mistake
intimately because this is the single
biggest misstep that I have made in my
content and entrepreneurial journey. So,
here's what I recommend you do instead
and what I wish I would have done if I
could go back to the beginning. Start
with a single platform and a single
content format. So for me it would have
been short form video on Instagram. What
you want to do is compound all your
focus and attention on that one single
surface. And that means becoming
automatic at making winning content
every single time for that platform.
Responding to all comments, responding
to all DMs, really going allin on that
one platform ecosystem. Then build a
system for producing the optimal content
volume on that platform. In this case
for Instagram with short form video,
it'd be one post per day. Build a system
for doing that and do not focus on
anything else until that system runs
itself. And the way you judge if it can
run itself is that you hire yourself out
of every non-delegatable task without
the quality or quantity going down. Now,
that system must be resilient enough to
run for 30 days in a row without
breaking. That's how you know it really
works. This will probably take you 3, 6,
maybe 12 months to do that one system
for that one platform in that one
format. It is only at that point, once
you have a system running for 30 days in
a row without breaking, that you should
then expand and try to tackle another
content platform. I call this overall
approach methodical expansion. This is
the right strategy to prevent yourself
from burnout and really set up a strong
foundation to be able to build on top
of. But most people don't do this. Most
people get a tiny bit of traction on
that first platform, realize it's going
to be a ton of work, fracture their
focus somewhere else because they think
it's an easier game, and then they're
fighting on two fronts, which brings
both of their outputs down. I know this
intimately because this is what I did.
The truth is, and this really is the
golden nugget, if you pick the right
platform format combination the first
time for whatever it is your business
is, you might not ever need a second,
third, or fourth. That first one could
feed your business forever. So, if
you're a beginner, hopefully this is
encouraging to hear. You don't need to
fight on all fronts. Pick one format,
one platform, and go all in on getting
the most out of it. Build a system,
delegate yourself out of that system,
make sure it's resilient, and then
consider expanding to a second. All
right, social media mistake number three
is what I call shotgun topics. And this
happens when you cover too many
different topics on the same social
media account. This is one of those
mistakes that is going to make your
growth feel like quicksand. You're
moving, your legs are turnurning, but
you're actually going nowhere. Here's
what happens. Social media algorithms
are designed to cluster around similar
topics. That's how they're built. This
is why social media in the 4U era is not
really social media anymore. It's more
like interest media. The algorithms
figure out what topics you're interested
in as a viewer. Detect what topic a
video is about and then try to best
match the two so that viewers see things
they're interested in. So, as a creator,
your only goal is to train the algorithm
that your channel is a go-to for a
specific topic cluster set. The more it
feels confident in this designation, the
more it will know who to put your videos
in front of and the more it will push
them. The big mistake that many creators
and brands make, especially at the
beginning, is that they assume the
viewer is there for them as the person.
And because of that, they have a free
license to talk about whatever topic
they want. The truth is, viewers aren't
watching for you. They're watching for
their own selfish interest, whether that
be entertainment or educational value.
Now, I'll admit maybe your top 5 to 10%
super fans will listen to you talk about
whatever topic you want, regardless of
it's in their interest set. But for the
other 90 to 95%, the masses, they
couldn't care less if you cover a topic
they don't care about. So, when creators
or brands try to cover too many topics
on the same channel, the algorithm gets
confused, doesn't know who to push you
for, and then pushes you less. So, my
recommendation is very simple. Build a
channel that is worldclass around a
single topic. If you have an offer, a
product, or a personal brand domain that
you know you're building for, this
shouldn't be hard. You already have your
topic. Stick with that. And if you're
early in the content game and you're not
really sure what category or topic to
pick, that's totally fine. Feel free to
experiment and jump around. Just know
you won't grow very fast until you lock
in on one. Again, this is something that
I personally struggle with a lot in my
own channels. And upon reflection, I
realized I was playing the game
completely wrong. That's why I didn't
grow as fast as I wanted. I had a tech
and AI channel where I also intermixed
videos about brand and marketing. I
thought I'm the GOAT so I can violate
the rules and people would just follow
for me and it doesn't really matter. I
was wrong because even though I was
getting millions of views on both types
of videos, my audience wasn't growing.
And that's because every time I posted,
only half of my audience would have
cared about the topic in the first
place. And that half was switching
depending on whether I was making tech
or marketing. What I realized is that
I'd be a lot better off just making two
different accounts and training them
separately, separate algorithms,
separate audiences, and compounding like
that. This way, I could become a go-to
in each field and have the algorithm
help me both times instead of hurt me.
Do not cover too many topics on a single
channel. If you're trying to grow
faster, just pick one or make multiple
channels. All right, social media
mistake number four and a huge trap is
probably the most common question that I
get asked and it has to do with picking
your niche. specifically feeling like
you wasted time and effort if you picked
the wrong one. So, the question we're
answering here and the pitfall we're
really avoiding is, how do I pick the
right niche based on my goals so that I
make sure I use my time wisely? Now, I'm
going to make it super simple for you. I
have a four question framework that you
can use to figure out what niche is best
for you. And this works for every
person, brand, creator, any scenario.
This is the ideal formula for figuring
out your niche. Okay, it's a four
question thing. The first question, are
you trying to make money from content or
not? If not, the answer is easy. You
should pick the niche or topic that
you're most interested in. Don't
overthink it. Don't try to calculate
things. You're not going for money. You
know that. And so, pick the topic that
you actually care the most about. If
yes, you are trying to make money from
content. Maybe not today. Maybe today,
maybe eventually. Keep going to question
two. All right. Second question. Do you
already have a product or offer or
service or an established personal brand
niche that you know you want to drive
traffic to? Yes or no? If yes, then
that's also easy because the topic or
niche decision has already been made for
you. If you have a product or service or
offer, you're making content about that
niche. Your goal is to become an expert
or position your brand as an expert in
that niche to flow back to the product.
If you sell accounting services, you're
making accounting content. If you sell
social media growth coaching, you're
making content about social media.
Again, your goal is to become one of the
most well-known brands or personal
brands in the space, developing an
expertise or perspective on that topic.
Okay? Now, if you don't already have a
product or offer or service or personal
brand category defined, you're going to
keep going to question three. Okay,
question three. Are you a complete
beginner with zero content skills in
this format, or do you have the basics
already dialed? And by the way, the only
way you should consider having the
basics dialed is if you've made a lot of
content in this exact format. So, if
you're doing short form video, the only
way you can say you have the basics
dialed is if you've made 30 or more
short form videos in the past. So, if
you've never done 30 short form videos,
if that's the medium you're going for,
you are considered a beginner. Okay. So,
question three is, are you a beginner or
not? If you're a beginner, you're going
to pick whatever topic you're most
interested in. Doesn't matter, and
you're going to make 20 or 30 short form
videos on that. And I know this will
sound counterintuitive, but you're going
to assume after those 20 to 30 videos,
you may have to start over from scratch
on a new topic. And this is completely
fine. It's completely okay. Those first
20 to 30 videos are what I consider your
learning era. Because the truth is, if
you're trying to actually make money
from social media, closing the skill gap
on how you make content will come before
you actually make any money. So, the
most important thing you can do is pick
a topic you actually like so that you
make enough videos to be able to close
the gap. You have to close the gap. The
only way to close it is to make videos.
The only way you're going to keep making
enough videos to close it is by picking
a topic you actually care about. Now,
once you hit 20 to 30 videos on whatever
topic you picked, you will graduate from
a true beginner to having the basics
covered, level one to level two. And at
that time, you can decide to keep going
with the niche you've chosen based on
all the new information and skills you
have, or restart from zero with a new
niche, but you get to take the skills
with you. Okay? Okay. So, once you
graduate from being a beginner to having
the basics dialed, whether you came into
this exercise having the basics done, or
you've done step three, you did the 20
to 30 videos on your favorite topic, and
now you have the basics covered, we're
going to move to the last question,
question four. Question four, are you
trying to eventually monetize from your
own products, services, or offers, or
are you mostly trying to monetize from
brand deals? And I know you may not
understand what this means today if
you're a pure beginner, but let me try
to break this down. Really, what I'm
saying is, do you eventually want to
both have to make content and make
products, or do you just want to make
content and get paid to make content?
Those are kind of the two paths. Now,
like I said, if you're a true beginner,
you may not understand the difference
today. But that's fine because you're
not going to be on step four today.
You're going to be on step three, making
your first 20, 30 videos to close the
skill gap. Okay, now back to the
monetization because question four is
really where people get tripped up. If
you're trying to monetize from your own
products or services, but you don't have
them today, you don't know what they're
going to be. The best way to pick what
content to make is either a space where
you have unique insights or experience.
Maybe you worked a job in the past,
maybe you've really studied it or
focused in, or you pick a customer
profile that you want to spend the next
decade interacting with, talking with,
studying, and communicating with. This
is how you work backwards. If you don't
have a product or offer today, but you
think you want one in the future, this
is how you start with the content
audience to then fit into the product or
offer. For example, let's say you have a
bunch of unique knowledge around
wellness. You studied nutrition in
college. You worked at a wellness
startup. You just really care about
wellness. Or you just want to be in the
wellness space. You know that. You just
don't know how. You don't know what you
want to make, etc. Well, then I would
pick wellness as my content topic and
start hammering videos in wellness.
Eventually, you will figure out what
people need and build a product or
offer. But you don't need to close that
gap today. What you do want to do is
make sure directionally you're angled
towards a space that you want to keep
going in. And so thinking about where
you have expertise or which audience
profile you want to play with is a
really good way to think about this
backwards. Okay. Now, on the other side,
let's say you never want to own your own
products, right? Making content is
enough. You don't want to have to both
make content and make products. You're
good just making content. That would be
the brand deal side. What you really
want is to make content, have brands pay
you to do it. So, if that's you, the way
I would pick my niche, if I don't
already have one that I'm obsessed with,
I would pick one where you have huge
companies that make a ton of profit
already paying influencers a lot to make
content. So, for example, if you're
trying to monetize from brand deals, but
you cover nonprofits, well, you're going
to have a problem because the nonprofits
don't pay influencers that much to cover
them. So, if you actually want to build
a business and make money from brand
deals, you got to pick a niche where the
companies that are already paying
influencers are paying a ton because
that shows they're willing to pay more.
So, if this is your path, I would spend
less time thinking about what customer
you're selling to and more time thinking
about the players in the industry or the
players in the space that would be
paying you for those brand deals cuz
your customers really are the brands,
not the end buyer. Now the truth is
ideally whether you take the products
and services path or the brand deal path
there's some vin diagram that merges
what you actually care about and then
either where you have unique interest or
which brands are paying. Ideally there's
an intersection that overlaps and that's
the niche you pick. The reality though
is that it's going to take hundreds of
videos or hundreds of posts on social
media for you to see any amount of
money. So you really do need to pick a
niche that you think you could make at
least 100 posts about. So, that's the
four question framework that really
applies to any creator or brand on earth
that runs through exactly how to pick
your niche. The honest truth about
content and social media is that the
only way you lose is if you stop
posting. And so, as long as you pick a
category that you'll keep posting in,
you'll win for sure. This is why I can't
tell you personally which niche to pick
specifically. I can only give you a
framework to try to think through what
matters at every stage. So, if you're a
beginner, and I know a lot of people are
watching this, pick a single category
you're interested in. Make 30 videos.
close that beginner skill gap and then
re-evaluate with question four. All
right, by the way guys, if you like how
I'm breaking all of this down, kind of
trying to explain these heady concepts
that not a lot of people talk about into
simple terms, I actually built a free
community specifically for business
owners where I do this for every aspect
of the content workflow. If you're
trying to grow on social media, you're
trying to grow on YouTube, you need help
with strategy, with thumbnails, with
execution, with editing, all of it is
explained in this type of framework in
Wavy World. We have 65 free trainings.
35,000 entrepreneurs are already in
there. It's really a no-brainer. If you
want to get better at content and you're
a business owner, it's for you. Got a
link in the description below if you
want to sign up. All right. Social media
mistakes number five and six really go
hand in hand. So, I'm going to combine
them together here. And they really have
to do with experimenting to find new
visual formats and then sticking with
one once you have it working. Most
creators and brands are on the hunt for
one thing. When you scroll and you're
like, I want mine to look like this.
What you're really looking for is a
signature visual format that you can hit
over and over and over that just looks
like you branding visually execution
that just feels like you. That's what
most people are looking for. Now, there
are a ton of great examples of this in
action on social media today. Of course,
my friend Orin has a signature format
called product verse brand where he
takes a category, water bottles or
coffee machines, and he breaks down the
different products or brands that people
buy. Are you buying it for the product
because the utility and functionality or
are you buying it for the brand because
you're paying a markup for the name or
logo? There's a popular creator called
Khloe Sha who has a famous series 30
lessons under 30. She crushed from that.
Another creator Adrien Purr, super sick,
has his own kind of signature visual
format. You recognize immediately that
it's one of his videos. My friend Ryan
too has a really cool series called
Creator Marketing where he breaks down
creators. Again, you see this, you
immediately know it's his. The list goes
on and on, but most of the biggest
creators have their own signature visual
format, and that is what you know them
for. But why I wanted to cover this in
this video is that there's a common
mistake a lot of people fall into when
it comes to approaching this visual
format. And the first one has to do with
beginners stressing themselves out when
they don't have one initially. When
you're a beginner, and I know this
because I was a beginner and felt this
too, all you want is to close the gap
between where you are today, meh, and
then the future of having a dialed
signature visual format that people
love. All you want is to close that gap.
But from my experience, and this is the
huge mistake, you cannot force the
discovery of this signature visual
format. If you constantly think about it
and try to overengineer it, it will not
come. Most of these signature formats or
signature visuals were born out of one
rogue idea that those creators had. They
tried a bunch of stuff, threw it at the
wall, something stickked, they doubled
down a couple times, realized it was a
pattern that it was working, and that's
how they eventually emerged to have this
signature format. So, here are two quick
tips for beginners or brands for how to
find your own signature visual format
without getting super anxious or forcing
it. The first one is all you really need
is one unique angle or signature visual
element in your videos. Maybe it's a
small object you hold every single time
you film. Maybe it's a specific
animation or graphic style. Maybe it's a
certain font. Maybe it's a certain color
palette that you use every single time.
Instead of trying to force architect an
entire world on day one, which is a lot
to bite off, just focus on picking one
visual element that you want to
experiment with including this element
might morph into your full signature
visual style eventually. Now, second,
this is the most helpful workflow I
found to try to discover what these
signature visual formats are that are
working in your space so you can get
inspiration for your own. The first
thing you're going to do is pull up all
the popular creators in your niche on
sandcastle.ai. Then, when you're in the
videos tab, you can go to the channel
filter and search individual creators
one after another. When you sort all
their videos in the videos tab by views,
you can see their top performing videos.
What you'll notice pretty quickly is
that any series they have will show
itself in the top. So, for example, we
pulled my friend Orin up, his last 12
months worth of posts and sorted it by
views. And right away, you can
immediately see the product verse brand
format and series really shows at the
top. A lot of his top performing posts
are in this format. So, if you're in the
brand marketing or social media growth
or creative direction space and you like
Orin and you pulled him up, you might
see this and be like, hm, what can I
take from this and twist to make my own
signature visual format? So, maybe
instead of his product verse brand, if
you're in the cooking niche, you come up
with a series called Dine Verse Dash,
where you go to restaurants and you film
in an interesting visual way their
signature dishes as they get served. And
then you decide in the video if you're
going to dine, eat it, or dash, leave.
That could be an interesting twist on
Orin's signature format that you use on
your own. Or maybe you make the series
eat in or take out where if you're a
chef at home, you cook your own version
of a signature dish. You also take out
one from the restaurant and then you
compare them side by side and you could
shoot it really cool in the kitchen.
See, the core of Orin series product
versus brand is there. The core bones
are there, but you really iterated and
twisted it a ton to where it's almost
not recognizable. So, the mistake here
is avoiding forcing the visual style
from day one. either pick a small
element and experiment or do some
research on the top creators in your
space and try to understand what format
visually and series-wise they've created
and then twist it to try to make your
own. Now, one other tip on the flip side
for the few people watching this that do
already have a signature visual format.
Don't go away from it. Too many people
have something working but then pivot
and try to chase corny styles or weird
trends that only last for a couple days.
If you have a bell cow, run it over and
over. Once you have something working,
run it over and over and over and over
until it stops working. If you strike
gold, it'll keep working. I'm telling
you, people will tend to associate you
with this visual style and it will
deepen their fandom more quickly. So, if
you get one of these winners, do not
abandon it. All right, mistake number
seven is really the macdaddy of all
these mistakes. And this is not letting
the data tell you which content you
should make next. It boggles my mind how
many creators and brands are making
content fully based on their gut, not
using any data at all. The truth is, if
you just replicate the content that's
already working in your niche over and
over, you will win. It really is that
simple. And that's because human viewers
tend to behave the same way over and
over. Now, I realized pretty early on
that using data to inform my ideas and
the way I executed videos was a cheat
code that most creators were not tapping
into. And so, that's why I spent the
last 12 months codifying that system
into a tool. That's what Sandcastles.ai
is really. Sand castles is just a social
media data engine that lets you find and
use proven content formats to then
incorporate in your own content to make
it better. This exactly how I use it to
get a data advantage over everyone else.
First, I build a list of all the top
performing creators or brand accounts in
my space. Then I use that list and
organize all their top performing videos
in one place. So what you're seeing
would be the last 3, 6, or 12 months
organized by views or by outlier score
or by engagement score. Immediately, I
can see all the winners organized right
there for me. Now, here's where it gets
crazy. I can now click into any of those
videos, and I can extract out the
topics, the hooks, or the storytelling
style that they use one click. So, right
here, I can take this video, go to the
transcript, see that I like the hook,
click save that hook to my vault, and
then I've extracted that hook as a
component template that I can use in
future videos that I make. Now, this
vault is basically my personalized
database of all the winning hooks and
styles that I found across all winning
videos. So then when I go to write a new
script on whatever topic I want, I can
use that proven hook or proven
storytelling style again and again and
again with one click. So it's my topic
using their proven hook or their style
or it's my topic using their proven hook
or my style or it's my topic using my
best proven hooks and my style. There's
infinite combinations when you build
this vault out. Either way, I'm using
the best of the best of the best
components at every stage. And this
workflow allows me to build a banger
script in literally 60 seconds using
validated pieces at every step. I know
the topics worked because I saw them
ranked. I know the hooks worked because
I saw the views. I know the style worked
because I saw the views. I'm using
databacked pieces to make my own
versions. This is what using the data to
make content on social media really
looks like. And the truth is, most
creators and brands are not yet
approaching social media in this way.
The ones that do are crushing everyone
else because they only use the things
that are proven with data. If you want
to learn more about how to build one of
these datadriven content systems using
sand castles the way I did it, I'll link
a few things below that walk you through
exactly how to do it. All right, guys.
That's all I've got for this video. We
covered the seven deadly pitfalls,
really the most common mistakes that
people on social media make that prevent
them from growing more quickly. And as
always guys, I'm trying to bring the
stuff that most people don't talk about.
I'm trying to cover different things
that aren't just regurgitation so that
you get unique insights and you have an
edge over everyone else. So if you're a
business owner focused on using content
to grow your business, this YouTube
channel is the best in the world. Also,
if that's you and you like this channel,
there's no reason you shouldn't be in
Wavy World. I've got 65 free trainings
in there with 35,000 other business
owners. If you're not in there, they're
getting an edge over you cuz everyone's
collaborating with each other to try to
improve their content together. So, if
you want to join that, I got a free
invite link in the description below.
All right, we'll see you guys on the
next video.